---
title: "4. Perspectives"
author: Antoine Gréa
bibliography: bibliography/thesis.bib
style: thesis
---

# Perspectives

## Knowledge representation

Listing the contributions there are a couple that didn't make the cut. It is mainly ideas or projects that were too long to check or implement and needed more time to complete. SELF is still a prototype, and even if the implementation seemed to perform well on a simple example, no benchmarks have been done on it.
It might be good to make a theoretical analysis of OWL compared to SELF along with some benchmark results.

On the theoretical parts there are some works that seems worthy of exposure even if unfinished.


### Literal definition using Peano's axioms {#sec:peano}

The only real exceptions to the axioms and criteria are the first statement, the comments and the liberals.

For the first statement, there is yet to find a way to express both inclusion, the equality relation and solution quantifier. If such a convenient expression exists, then the language can become almost entirely self described.

Comments can be seen as a special kind of container. The difficult part is to find a clever way to differentiate them from regular containers and to ignore their content in the regular grammar. It might be possible to at first describe their structure but then they become parseable entities and fail at their purpose.

Lastly, and perhaps the most complicated violation to fix: laterals. It is quite possible to define literals by structure. First we can define boolean logic quite easily in SELF as demonstrated by @lst:bool.

```{#lst:bool .java caption="Possible definition of boolean logic in SELF." escapechar=$}
~(false) = true;$\label{line:negation}$
( false, true ) :: Boolean;$\label{line:boolean}$
true =?; //conflicts with the first statement!$\label{line:true}$
*a : ((a | true) = true);$\label{line:logic}$
*a : ((false | a) = a);
*a : ((a & false) = false); 
*a : ((true & a) = a);
```

Starting with @line:negation, we simply define the negation using the exclusive quantifier. From there we define the boolean type as just the two truth values. And now it gets complicated. We could either arbitrarily say that the false literal is always parameters of the exclusion quantifier or that it comes first on either first two statements but that would just violate minimalism even more. We could use the solution quantifier to define truth but that collides with the first statement definition. There doesn't seem to be a good answer for now.

From @line:logic going on, we state the definition of the logical operators $\land$ and $\lor$. The problem with this is that we either need to make a native property for those operators or the inference to compute boolean logic will be terribly inefficient.

We can use Peano's axioms -@peano_arithmetices_1889 to define integers in SELF. The attempt at this definition is presented in @lst:peano.

```{#lst:peano .java caption="Possible integration of the Peano axioms in SELF."}
0 :: Integer;
*n : (++(n) :: Integer);
(*m, *n) : ((m=n) : (++m = ++n));
*n : (++n ~= 0);
*n : ((n + 0) = n);
(*n, *m) : ((n + ++m)= ++(n + m));
*n : ((n × 0) = 0);
(*n, *m) : ((n × ++m) = (n + (n × m)));
```

We got several problems doing so. The symbols `*` and `/` are already taken in the default file and so would need replacement or we should use the non-ASCII `×` and `÷` symbols for multiplication and division. Another more fundamental issue is as previously discussed for booleans: the inference would be excruciatingly slow or we should revert to a kind of parsing similar to what we have already under the hood. The last problem is the definition of digits and bases that would quickly become exceedingly complicated and verbose.

For floating numbers this turns out even worse and complicated and such a description wasn't even attempted for now.

The last part concerns textual laterals. The issue is the same as the one with comments but even worse. We get to interpret the content as literal value and that would necessitate a similar system as we already have and wouldn't improve the minimalist aspect of things much. Also we should define ways to escape characters and also to input escape sequences that are often needed in such case. And since SELF isn't meant for programming that can become very verbose and complex.

### Advanced Inference

The inference in SELF is very basic. It could be improved a lot more by simply checking the consistency of the database on most aspects. However, such a task seems to be very difficult or very slow. Since that kind of inference is undecidable in SELF, it would be all a research problem just to find a performant inference algorithm.

Another kind of inference is more about convenience. For example, one can erase singlets (containers with a single value) to make the database lighter and easier to maintain and query.

### Queries

We haven't really discussed quarries in SELF. They can be made using the main syntax and the solution quantifiers but efficiency of such queries is unknown. Making an efficient query engine is a big research project on its own.

For now a very simplified query API exists in the prototype and seems to perform well but further tests are needed to assess its scalability capacities.

## General Automated Planning

## Planning Improvements

### Heuristics using Semantics

### Macro-Action learning

## Recognition

### Existing approcahes



### Inverted planning


#### Probabilities and approximations

We define a probability distribution over dated states of the world. That distribution is in part given and fixed and the rest needs computation. **TODO : that's super bad...**

Here is the list of given prior probabilities and asumptions :

* $P(O)=\prod_{o\in O} P(o)$
* $P(\mathcal{G}) = \sum_{G\in \mathcal{G}}P(G) = 1$ since we assume that the agent must be pursuing one of the goals.
* $P(G|\pi) = 1$ for a plan $\pi$ appliable in $I$ that achieves $G$.

From dirrect application of Bayes theorem and the previous assomptions, we have :

$$ P(\pi|O) = \frac{P(O|\pi) P(\pi)}{P(O)} = \frac{P(O|\pi) P(\pi|G) P(G)}{P(O)}$$ {#eq:plan-obs}

$$ P(G|O) = \frac{P(O|G)P(G)}{P(O)}$$ {#eq:goal-obs}

From the total probability formula :

$$P(O|G) = \sum_{\pi \in \Pi_G} P(O|\pi) P(\pi|G)$$ {#eq:obs-goal}

### Rico

